remember that weird moment back in
January 2016 was during the primaries
when Donald Trump was in a fight with
Fox News and he decided to skip their
debate and instead held a fundraiser for
veterans and he bragged that he raised
six million dollars for the vets
including a million from his own pocket
and then started handing out these huge
novelty checks on the campaign trail but
here's the thing he stiffed veterans
even it was the craziest thing so one
reporter at the Washington Post just
started running around trying to find
out exactly where the money went
and what he found out was that Donald
Trump hadn't donated all that at all the
reporter basically shamed him into
giving the money and then we pretty good
and then we went on to elect that guy
president and and the one who reported
it got a Pulitzer and and he he has now
become the foremost reporter on the
scope of the president's corruption and
his conflicts of interest
David Farenthold joins me now
[Applause]
so you you start on this journey where
the president says I gave a million
dollars you think well where is that you
start calling up organizations yeah at a
certain point the president calls you
he's a candid at that point is that
right yeah he called me and so at this
point his campaign had said he'd given a
million dollars to veterans but I
couldn't find any evidence that he had
I'd spent all this time looking calling
every you know every veterans
organization I could think of every
person who knew a veteran I could think
of I couldn't find any evidence he'd
given the money out and so Trump called
me and Trump said then okay you know ten
minutes ago I gave the million dollars
away okay just be now yeah right and it
was one of the strangest conversations
I've ever had because it didn't in there
there was a bunch of other people's
money that other people had given him
that he was still sitting on that he
said he would give to veterans and so
well I had him on the phone I would say
look okay you know where's that money
and he he would it was just weird
interaction where he would say instead
of answering the question he would say
you're a nasty person you know you
you're the worst person ever and and it
like what's the point in arguing about
that first of all I can't be the worst
person if and but also what's the point
in arguing about that so I would try I
would say okay you know thank you mr.
president and mr. candidate let's go
back to the subject of these donations
and he would sort of briefly reset and
answer the question sort of semi
factually or address it factually but
then devolve into insults again we did
that five or six times
before the interview was over and so
then you so after this big kind of you
discovered this thing he said he gave a
million dollars he didn't then he has to
give it and then your editor Marty Baron
has a conversation with you about how to
make this a be right this had been sort
of a one-off kind of a hobby for me it
was not like somebody said go go write
about Donald Trump's charitable giving
but Marty said that and said okay well
in that under the microscope of a
presidential campaign this is the
brightest spotlight we have in American
journalism this guy tried to stiff
veterans or the most honored group in
our society and if he's willing to try
that under the microscope we have on him
now what was he doing before when it was
just entertainment tonight keeping him
honest that's right
so you um so you do this great reporting
on the foundation throughout the
campaign there's this great one there's
all these amazing cultural details one
of them is he keeps buying big portraits
of himself with we have that port we
have the portrait of like foundation
money he uses foundation money to buy
big portraits of himself then puts them
in his property and there's no money
that ever goes to check like there's not
real charity there well so this is what
happened people often at mar-a-lago this
sort of as sort of a side entertainment
they'll have like an auction of
paintings or whatever and I think that
artists had learned that if you paint a
picture of Donald Trump he has to buy it
because no one else will buy it and then
if just hitting their unsold and so he
would buy these paintings of himself and
then this is a charity auction so right
like if you want to spew us to spend
$20,000 which is what it was in one case
to buy a giant picture of himself
great the money goes to charity the
problem is that he didn't use his own
money he used this charities money to
buy to save him money okay and now if
you do that if your charity buys the
painting that painting is now a
charitable asset and must be used for
charitable purposes so that became an
important question where is this
painting is it hanging on the wall of a
Children's Hospital someplace I know
that you'd endorse that but that would
be very charitable in a legal sense and
a legal sense of which Children's
Oncology Warren so we needed to know
where it was what purpose is it serving
and so after a long search using Twitter
one of my Twitter followers found it
hanging on the wall of his Golf Resort
at Doral future site of the group of
seven summit we're gonna talk about it
well you so you do this and basically
now that Emira the foundation has been
shut down by the state authorities it
the New York Attorney General has
basically shuttered it
there's they're going to shut it down as
soon as they can figure out how to
distribute it's the court will supervise
the distribution of its assets what is
you then move into a different sort of
part of this beat which is you know the
foundation is relatively small and it's
a small world and you can kind of track
down they both have to have public
filings you could track down some other
folks that are involved in it now we
have a president who has a vast business
empire that he's not really that
disconnected from what have you been
able to find out about that part of his
finances you're right that that's been a
much more difficult task because it's
unlike the charity a lot of its assets
and details are much better hidden but
we spent a lot of time on it now and
what we know is that it's a lot of it is
not doing very well and we spend a lot
time trying to fix identify on the logic
that if his business does more doesn't
worse he could become more desperate for
favors or other people seeking to help
him through his business right you'd
rather have a president as bad as it
sounds you maybe would rather have a
president getting rich off his business
than a president losing money and
needing help with his business
you know I have never heard you
articulate that as that so your theory
of the case is a desperate in debt
spiraling downward president would be
dangerous from a corruption perspective
or a foreign influence perspective
because they might be desperate to do
whatever they can to get loans or gifts
or money to stay afloat right you at
least as an American you'd want to know
that the president's trying to you know
to pay off a loan on Friday you know
what will he do if he's if he's in that
kind of desperation so what we've looked
at a lot of his businesses I still can't
tell you if the whole business is making
money or losing money but a lot of his
new businesses are doing poorly some of
them are shut down this hotel he's lost
hotels so it's we've spent a lot of time
trying to understand that piece of it as
well as who is putting money in well
that part has been really interesting so
you've had a few stories that we've
we've covered on the show and I think
you know almost it's so facto merit if
not impeachment real real scrutiny right
our proposed real constitutional threats
I mean I think you have two stories at
least one and maybe two stories about
Saudis just dumping a ton of money into
his hotels that's right there's at least
two instances of that one Saudi
lobbyists right after he gets elected
they're running this sort of sort of
bogus lobbying campaign where they would
fly American veterans into Washington
have
lobby Congress for a bill that's the
Saudi secretly opposed against the city
they were doing the Saudis bidding
without knowing it and loan right so
it's this weird thing where you've got
veterans who get flown out to lobby
against a bill the Saudis want to kill
yes they don't know they're doing it the
pastor Saudis the Saudis are putting the
money and putting them up in the Trump
Hotel five hundred hotel rooms five
hundred rooms over the course of three
months at the Trump Hotel plus banquet
halls meals all kinds of things it was
at least two hundred and seventy
thousand dollars I mean just to put it
in context if we found out that NBS had
written a check to Donald Trump for two
hundred seventy thousand dollars which
is not you know obviously there's some
expenses here but if we found out that
the Saudi prince had written the
president a check for two hundred
seventy thousand dollars that would
obviously be great the biggest story in
the world right right and I think we are
just trying to like it we're just
starting to understand how it works with
Trump right the I mean maybe somebody is
writing him checks I don't know I've
never seen that but there are ways that
people get money to him through his
businesses his businesses are a hundred
percent owned by him so you pay his
business two hundred seventy thousand
dollars that's a personal asset of his
in you're right there's there's expenses
it's not two hundred seventy thousand
dollars a pure profit but that's money
that goes to a pot that he controls it's
not just that - it's it's the fact that
when you do five hundred rooms of
business or in the case of the of the
Trump Hotel here in New York when the
Saudis family came through and I think
you've reported that they like they put
them in the black for the quarter right
so yeah the the Trump Hotel in New York
on Central Park West has not been doing
very well it's been losing a lot of
business but they wrote this letter to
their investors at the beginning of last
year saying great news for once we made
a profit for the quarter and the reason
was one group of Saudi travelers
traveling with the crown prince they
stayed for five days they spent so much
the whole hotel made money for the
quarter so there's two things about that
that are problematic one the the
Constitution's emoluments Clause the
idea of but two in both those cases you
can imagine the information getting back
to the president right I mean it would
be one thing if this was happening and
he was blind to it all he doesn't know
where the money is coming from but when
they write an investment letter to
investor saying we had a great quarter
because the Saudis came through were
five hundred rooms get booked there's a
plausible case that it gets back to him
right that's one thing that we've really
been interested in and I can't tell you
that much about is what information gets
to him and how it gets to him right so
if the Saudis spend that much money and
they tell him they're investors about it
you know
does that go to him who tells him that
communication between the business and
Trump is something I still don't
understand very well yeah you both those
cases you got scoops right you got tips
mm-hmm there is no correct me if I'm
wrong there's no real way to look into
the president's finances right now no no
I mean not in any sort of holistic way I
can tell you how this business is doing
or that business is doing but the whole
shabang know um you mentioned this
earlier the president started the week
by getting up in front of a microphone
and promoting Doral which is his
property in in Florida as the site of
the next g7 how is Doral doing not well
really poorly actually Doral it's
important to know at the start Doral is
a huge part of his finances it's a big
hotel but unlike other hotels he owns it
directly so all the revenue goes to it's
not a franchise it's not exactly and so
it's the biggest source of revenue of
all his hotels it has one of the biggest
loans and since 2015 it has been in the
words of Trump's own representatives
severely underperforming and profits
have gone down 69% since 2015 and the
reason it was actually great we got this
video of trumps representative talking
to miami-dade county in search of a
lower tax valuation but she was
explaining why the hotel was doing so
poorly and she said basically the reason
is Trump the reason is the brand there's
a negative connotation on the brand so
this is a hotel that needs help
this is a hotel that could use a big
influx of Revenue I mean even if it
didn't you know it didn't push in a
profit profitability just a bunch of
revenue to keep the lights on would be
hugely welcome there
final question um the investigative
reporting a genie pops out of the lamp
and he comes to you David Farenthold and
he says David I grant you one wish you
get to look at any any set of documents
you want well let me get the Trump or AG
I guess there UFO's
right I mean I guess I'd wanted what I'd
want to know is how is the business
doing overall and if it needs financial
help where does that financial help come
from have they ever gone to anybody
outside their company an outside of the
sources of money we know about which are
Deutsche Bank and other other public
lenders have they ever reached out
beyond that for financial help either
during the presidency or in the years
preceding the presidency great question
maybe we'll get an answer someday david
farriner all thanks for being with
[Applause]